Let's take a look at how we can use expression browser to experiment with
the PromQL Query Language and form some expressions here in Prometheus,
This is where my expression would go.
I can actually insert different metrics that I have access to.
As you add more and more exporters,
this list will get larger and larger.
Since Prometheus was written on top of the Go language,
you're going to find a lot of Go-related metrics.
But if you scroll down,
you'll start to see some other things like network activity,
anything that starts with node.
Prefix is going to be something that comes from one of the node exporters.
So you can see here there's disk_io,
there is reads and writes.
There are all things in here.
What we're mostly interested in though is the node memory,
so let's find that.
Here's a whole section of memory.
I want to show the available memory or the free memory on the machine.
Let's find node memory and then maybe MemFree,
There we go, MemFree and bytes.
Let's use that and we'll execute that.
It's showing us the console output,
which is the current at this very moment.
Output, and this is in bytes;
the amount of memory that this instance has.
But it's a lot more interesting to show this on a graph.
When you show it on a graph, it shows it over time.
So this is the last hour of memory usage.
You can see here that we're looking at 600 megs.
This instance right here just happens to be using a lot more than the others.
It might be interesting to try to find out why.
This instance is using half of that nearly,
and then we've got several instances that are all
using very little memory, which is good.
So let's try to modify our expression just a little bit.
This is a lot like algebra,
so you can actually just type in a mathematical equation if you want to,
you can insert other metrics and add them together,
multiply them, divide them, all things.
We're actually just going to divide by 1024,
basically one million or one meg.
We can see this number instead of 600M,
we're going to get just 600,
so 600 megs now instead of bytes.
So just a very simple way to modify this number,
but you can do all things with that.
Remember that this Prometheus expression browser is not really meant to give
you your primary way to monitor or to visualize your data,
it's really just a way to experiment.
So take this knowledge and this information into Grafana,
and you'll have a lot more to play with.
The metrics gathered from Prometheus don't mean a lot in their raw form, do they?
They need visualizations to help us understand what we're looking at.
It may not look like much now,
but with Prometheus's robust query language and a nice stream of data coming in,
you and all your data science buddies can geek out for hours.
When we understand the metrics in our systems and
how they relate to a server or application health,
we can start predicting issues before they even arise,
instead of just reacting to them.